LOSO
The paper discusses the importance of LOSO(leave one subject out)in evaluating EEG based machine learning algorithms for disease diagnosis. The EEG signals of different subjects are different, so this poses a challenge to develop a robust machine learning algorithm for EEG based disease diagnosis. EG signals can differ greatly between individuals, influenced by factors like brain structure, electrode placement, and noise. Traditional k-fold cross-validation, fails to account for variation in subject data as it can include data from same subject in training and testing sets, this lead to overoptimised results. So to overcome this, we use the LOSO evaluation method. It helps to generalize the results.
DATA-ACQUISITION AND PRE-PROCESSING
EEG data is recorded at multiple sessions, at a high sampling rate(500-1000)Hz. Electrodes are placed according to the international 10-20 system, and they capture both rest state and task related activities of the brain. Artifact removal is done. Faulty channels are determined using three different methods: probabilistic (threshold = 5), kurtosis (threshold = 5), and spectra (threshold = 2, 20 75 Hz). and the continuous EEG data is segmented into epochs. The epochs are non overlapping and there is no data leakage between each epoch.
MACHINE LEARNING MODEL
It is a multi-layered perceptron, consists of input layer, output layer and an arbitrary number of layers in between called hidden layers. Nodes of each hidden layer of an MLP are connected to every node in the previous and following layer. None of the nodes are connected to any other node of the same layer. The weights carried by these connections represents the strength of the connection. These weights are typically initialized randomly. The network used here has an input layer, 2 hidden layers, with 12 and 8 hidden units respectively and an output layer. The loss function was the binary cross entropy and adam as optimizer. The sigmoid was the activation function used for the output layer. The learning process of the network involves a process called backpropagation in which the right weights are biases are calculated for each layer. Now the LOSO-cross validation evaluation is used. In it, all data from all subjects was used for training except one, which was used for testing. This process is repeated for each subject. This does help in randomising the training set.
RESULTS
MLP demonstrated high effectiveness in identifying subjects with schizophrenia. MLP outperformed all other algorithms. Random forests(RF),Logistic Regression (LR), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), SVM with linear and RBF kernels were used to confirm the results, MLP consistently showed superior performance.
Thus MLP with LOSO is an effective way for predicting schizophrenia using EEG data, as it helps in developing a more robust mechanism and trains the model for more generalised subjects.
